# WPI_REU_RRI_2021
This repository contains MATLAB code created during the 2021 Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) sponsered by Worcester Polythechnic Institute (WPI). The industrial sponsor was the Renal Research Institute (RRI). 
Work was done by Veronica Berger (Williams College), Olivia Tom (Boston University), and Yael Yossefy (Wesleyan University). 
Our academic advisors were Dr. Sam Walcott and Dr. Duncan Wright. 
Our industrial liaison was Dr. Alhaji Cherif.

Abstract:
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2 or COVID-19) emerged in December of 2019, and subsequently profoundly affected public health.  Despite mitigation strategies, including effective vaccines, the virus is not yet under control.  It is therefore important to study how the virus is transmitted from person to person, as well as how it infects the body.  Mathematical models give us a better understanding of the virus and can provide insight into its infection and spread, allowing the prediction of how the disease affects vulnerable populations, e.g., patients with End-Stage Renal Disease, or ESRD.  We therefore developed two mathematical models: one describing the population-level spread of the disease, and one describing the dynamics of the virus within an infected patient. The population-level model stratifies the total population into nine different classes and describes the dynamics of these classes with a system of nonlinear differential equations.  This model fits US cumulative mortality data during the third wave (October 1, 2020 to February 1, 2021), but significantly over-predicts subsequent mortality.  Modifying this model to account for mitigation strategies (e.g., social distancing, mask wearing) that become more prevalent during outbreaks allows the model to fit the mortality data beyond the third wave, to successfully predict daily infections, and to capture the wave-like behavior of the disease. Our in-host model uses a similar system of nonlinear differential equations to simulate the interaction between viral particles and various aspects of the innate and adaptive immune response (e.g., T-cells, antibodies, and cytokines).  The model fits measurements of viral load as a function of time for infected patients from two different sources. Fits to measurements from individual patients allow us to estimate how parameters of the model vary from person to person.  Given the success of these models in fitting data from otherwise healthy individuals, fitting the models to data specific to patients with ESRD can give insight into transmission, rate of viral elimination, and other parameters that could be used to inform treatment protocols.

Acknowledgements:
We would like to acknowledge the support from the National Science Foundation under grant DMS-1757685 for the 2021 Worcester Polytechnic Institute Research Experience for Undergraduates program in Industrial Mathematics and Statistics, as well as the support from the Center for Industrial Mathematics and Statistics at WPI. We would also like to acknowledge our industrial sponsor, the Renal Research Institute, as well as our industrial liaison Dr. Alhaji Cherif. Finally, we would like to thank the Department of Mathematical Sciences at WPI, as well as our two advisors, Dr. Sam Walcott and Dr. Duncan Wright.

